CHAPTER V
Supplementary section for functioning assessment
This chapter has 120 four-character categories.
Code range starts with VD00
The section allows for creating functioning profiles and overall functioning scores of individuals, which are suitable to describe and quantify the level of functioning associated with a health conditions.
To guide functioning assessment, the section includes two ICF-based instruments developed by WHO: the WHO Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS 2.0 36-item version), and the Model Disability Survey (MDS). 
The section is complemented by a generic set of functioning categories of high explanatory power derived from the ICF Annex 9.
This chapter contains the following top level blocks:
•	WHODAS 2.0 36-item version
•	Brief Model Disability Survey
•	Generic functioning domains

WHODAS 2.0 36-item version ()
This subsection includes the domains and questions for use with the WHO Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0 (WHODAS 2.0) 36 item version. The WHODAS 2.0 captures an individual’s level of functioning in six major life domains of the “activity and participation” dimension: cognition, mobility, self-care, getting along, life activities and participation in society. For all domains, the WHODAS 2.0 36-item version provides domain-specific and overall summary score of functioning. The table below provides the classification of severity of the functioning problem, based on the response received to the question related to the relevant functioning category. For coding, the relevant additional digit is added after the decimal point to the code of the relevant functioning category.
additional digit	Level of functioning problem
.0	None (no problem)
.1	Mild
.2	Moderate
.3	Severe
.4	Extreme or cannot do

Cognition [WHODAS] ()
  VD00  	Attention functions [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in concentrating on doing something for ten minutes?

  VD01  	Memory functions [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in remembering to do important things?

  VD02  	Solving problems [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in analysing and finding solutions to problems in day to day life?

  VD03  	Basic learning [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in learning a new task, for example, learning how to get a new place?

  VD04  	Communicating with - receiving - spoken messages [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in generally understanding what people say?

  VD05  	Conversation [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in starting and maintaining a conversation?

Mobility [WHODAS] ()
  VD10  	Maintaining a standing position [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in standing for long periods such as 30 minutes?

  VD11  	Changing body position - standing [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in standing up from sitting down?

  VD12  	Moving around within the home [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in moving around inside your home?

  VD13  	Moving around outside the home and other buildings [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in getting out of your home?

  VD14  	Walking [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in walking a long distance such as a kilometre (or equivalent)?

Self-care [WHODAS] ()
  VD20  	Washing oneself [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in washing your whole body?

  VD21  	Dressing [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in getting dressed?

  VD22  	Eating [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in eating?

  VD23  	Carrying out daily routine [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in staying by yourself for a few days?

Getting along [WHODAS] ()
  VD30  	Relating with strangers [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in dealing with people you do not know?

  VD31  	Informal relationship with friends - maintaining [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in maintaining a friendship?

  VD32  	Family relationships [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in getting along with people who are close to you?

  VD33  	Informal relationship with friends - making new friends [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in making new friends?

  VD34  	Intimate relationships [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in sexual activities?

Life activities [WHODAS] ()
  VD40  	Taking care of household responsibilities [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in taking care of your household responsibilities?

  VD41  	Doing most important household tasks [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in doing most important household tasks well?

  VD42  	Doing housework [WHODAS]

VD42.0	Getting all needed housework done [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in getting all the household work done that you need to do?

VD42.1	Getting household work done quickly [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in getting your household work done as quickly as needed?

VD42.Y	Other specified doing housework [WHODAS]

VD42.Z	Doing housework [WHODAS], unspecified

  VD43  	Remunerative employment [WHODAS]

VD43.0	Difficulties in daily work or school [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in your day to day work/school?

VD43.1	Doing most important work or school task [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in doing your most important work/school tasks well?

VD43.2	Getting all needed work or school work done [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in getting all the work done that you need to do?

VD43.3	Getting remunerative work or school work done quickly [WHODAS]
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in getting your work done as quickly as needed?

VD43.Y	Other specified remunerative employment [WHODAS]

VD43.Z	Remunerative employment [WHODAS], unspecified

Participation and impact of health problems [WHODAS] ()
  VD50  	Recreation and leisure [WHODAS]
In the past 30 days, how much of a problem did you have in joining in community activities (for example: festivities, religious or other activities) in the same way as anyone else can?

  VD51  	Problems by barriers [WHODAS]
In the past 30 days, how much of a problem did you have because of barriers or hindrances in the world around you?

  VD52  	Human rights [WHODAS]
In the past 30 days, how much of a problem did you have living with dignity because of the attitudes and actions of others?

  VD53  	Time spent on health condition [WHODAS]
In the past 30 days, how much time did you spend on your health condition, or its consequences?

  VD54  	Emotional effect of health condition [WHODAS]
In the past 30 days, how much have you been emotionally affected by your health condition?

  VD55  	Health drain on financial resources [WHODAS]
In the past 30 days, how much has your health been a drain on the financial resources of you or your family?

  VD56  	Health problems causing family problems [WHODAS]
In the past 30 days, how much of a problem did your family have because of your health problems?

  VD57  	Problems in relaxation or pleasure [WHODAS]
In the past 30 days, how much of a problem did you have in doing things by yourself for relaxation or pleasure?

Brief Model Disability Survey ()
This subsection includes the domains and questions for use with the WHO Model Disability Survey (MDS) brief version. The brief MDS includes body functions as well as activities and participation categories. The brief MDS allows to generate an overall summary score of functioning.
  VE00  	Seeing and related functions [BMDS]
How much difficulty do you have seeing things at a distance [without glasses]?

  VE01  	Hearing and vestibular functions [BMDS]
How much difficulty do you have hearing [without hearing aids]?

Mental functions [BMDS] ()
  VE10  	Energy and drive functions [BMDS]

  VE11  	Sleep functions [BMDS]

  VE12  	Emotional functions [BMDS]

  VE13  	Attention functions [BMDS]

  VE14  	Memory functions [BMDS]

Sensory functions and pain [BMDS] ()
  VE20  	Sensation of pain [BMDS]

Generic functioning domains ()
This subsection contains a generic set of functioning categories of high explanatory power derived from the ICF Annex 9.
Mental functions ()
This chapter is about the functions of the brain: both global mental functions, such as consciousness, energy and drive, and specific mental functions, such as memory, language and calculation mental functions.
  VV00  	Energy and drive functions
General mental functions of physiological and psychological mechanisms that cause the individual to move towards satisfy specific needs and general goals in a persistent manner.
Exclusions:	Consciousness functions ()
Emotional functions (VV04)
Psychomotor functions ()
Sleep functions (VV01)
Temperament and personality functions ()

  VV01  	Sleep functions
General mental functions of periodic, reversible and selective physical and mental disengagement from one's immediate environment accompanied by characteristic physiological changes.
Exclusions:	Attention functions (VV02)
Consciousness functions ()
Energy and drive functions (VV00)
Psychomotor functions ()

  VV02  	Attention functions
Specific mental functions of focusing on an external stimulus or internal experience for the required period of time.
Exclusions:	Consciousness functions ()
Energy and drive functions (VV00)
Memory functions (VV03)
Perceptual functions ()
Psychomotor functions ()
Sleep functions (VV01)

  VV03  	Memory functions
Specific mental functions of registering and storing information and retrieving it as needed.
Inclusions:	immediate memory
recent memory
remote memory
memory span
remembering
Exclusions:	Attention functions (VV02)
Calculation functions ()
Consciousness functions ()
Higher-level cognitive functions ()
intellectual functioning ()
Mental functions of language ()
Orientation functions ()
Perceptual functions ()
Thought functions ()

  VV04  	Emotional functions
Specific mental functions related to the feeling and affective components of the processes of the mind.
Inclusions:	affect
sadness
tension
lability of emotion
flattening of affect
Exclusions:	Energy and drive functions (VV00)
Temperament and personality functions ()

  VV0Y  	Other specified mental functions

  VV0Z  	Mental functions, unspecified

Sensory functions and pain ()
This chapter is about the functions of the senses, seeing, hearing, tasting and so on, as well as the sensation of pain.
  VV10  	Seeing and related functions

  VV11  	Hearing and vestibular functions

  VV12  	Sensation of pain
Sensation of unpleasant feeling indicating potential or actual damage to some body structure.
Inclusions:	aching pain
burning pain
dull pain
sensations of generalized or localized pain
stabbing pain

  VV1Y  	Other specified sensory functions and pain

  VV1Z  	Sensory functions and pain, unspecified

Voice and speech functions ()
This chapter is about the functions of producing sounds and speech.
  VV20  	Voice functions
Functions of the production of various sounds by the passage of air through the larynx.
Exclusions:	Alternative vocalization functions ()
Articulation functions ()
Mental functions of language ()

  VV2Y  	Other specified voice and speech functions

  VV2Z  	Voice and speech functions, unspecified

Functions of the cardiovascular, haematological, immunological and respiratory systems ()
This chapter is about the functions involved in the cardiovascular system (functions of the heart and blood vessels), the haematological and immunological systems (functions of blood production and immunity), and the respiratory system (functions of respiration and exercise tolerance).
  VV30  	Exercise tolerance functions
Functions related to respiratory and cardiovascular capacity as required for enduring physical exertion.
Exclusions:	additional respiratory functions ()
Functions of the cardiovascular system ()
Haematological system functions ()
Respiration functions ()
Respiratory muscle functions ()

  VV3Y  	Other specified functions of the cardiovascular, haematological, immunological and respiratory systems

  VV3Z  	Functions of the cardiovascular, haematological, immunological and respiratory systems, unspecified

Functions of the digestive, metabolic and endocrine systems ()
This chapter is about the functions of ingestion, digestion and elimination, as well as functions involved in metabolism and the endocrine glands.
  VV40  	Functions related to the digestive system

  VV4Y  	Other specified functions of the digestive, metabolic and endocrine systems

  VV4Z  	Functions of the digestive, metabolic and endocrine systems, unspecified

Genitourinary and reproductive functions ()
This chapter is about the functions of urination and the reproductive functions, including sexual and procreative functions.
  VV50  	Urination functions
Functions of discharge of urine from the urinary bladder.
Exclusions:	Sensations associated with urinary functions ()
Urinary excretory functions ()

  VV51  	Sexual functions
Mental and physical functions related to the sexual act, including the arousal, preparatory, orgasmic and resolution stages.
Exclusions:	Procreation functions ()
Sensations associated with genital and reproductive functions ()

  VV5Y  	Other specified genitourinary and reproductive functions

  VV5Z  	Genitourinary and reproductive functions, unspecified

Neuromusculoskeletal and movement-related functions ()
This chapter is about the functions of movement and mobility, including functions of joints, bones, reflexes and muscles.
  VV60  	Mobility of joint functions
Functions of the range and ease of movement of a joint.
Exclusions:	Control of voluntary movement functions ()
Stability of joint functions ()

  VV61  	Muscle power functions
Functions related to the force generated by the contraction of a muscle or muscle groups.
Exclusions:	Functions of structures adjoining the eye (VV10)
Muscle endurance functions ()
Muscle tone functions ()

  VV6Y  	Other specified neuromusculoskeletal and movement-related functions

  VV6Z  	Neuromusculoskeletal and movement-related functions, unspecified

Functions of the skin and related structures ()
This chapter is about the functions of skin, nails and hair.
  VV70  	Functions of the skin

  VV7Y  	Other specified functions of the skin and related structures

  VV7Z  	Functions of the skin and related structures, unspecified

Learning and applying knowledge ()
This chapter is about learning, applying the knowledge that is learned, thinking, solving problems, and making decisions.
  VV80  	Basic learning

  VV81  	Solving problems
Finding solutions to questions or situations by identifying and analysing issues, developing options and solutions, evaluating potential effects of solutions, and executing a chosen solution, such as in resolving a dispute between two people.
Exclusions:	Making decisions ()
Thinking ()

  VV8Y  	Other specified learning and applying knowledge

  VV8Z  	Learning and applying knowledge, unspecified

General tasks and demands ()
This chapter is about general aspects of carrying out single or multiple tasks, organizing routines and handling stress. These items can be used in conjunction with more specific tasks or actions to identify the underlying features of the execution of tasks under different circumstances.
  VV90  	Carrying out daily routine
Carrying out simple or complex and coordinated actions in order to plan, manage and complete the requirements of day-to-day procedures or duties, such as budgeting time and making plans for separate activities throughout the day.
Exclusions:	Undertaking multiple tasks ()

  VV91  	Handling stress and other psychological demands
Carrying out simple or complex and coordinated actions to manage and control the psychological demands required to carry out tasks demanding significant responsibilities and involving stress, distraction, or crises, such as driving a vehicle during heavy traffic or taking care of many children.

  VV9Y  	Other specified general tasks and demands

  VV9Z  	General tasks and demands, unspecified

Communication ()
This chapter is about general and specific features of communicating by language, signs and symbols, including receiving and producing messages, carrying on conversations, and using communication devices and techniques.
  VW00  	Communicating with - receiving - spoken messages
Comprehending literal and implied meanings of messages in spoken language, such as understanding that a statement asserts a fact or is an idiomatic expression.

  VW01  	Conversation
Starting, sustaining and ending an interchange of thoughts and ideas, carried out by means of spoken, written, signed or other forms of language, with one or more people one knows or who are strangers, in formal or casual settings.

  VW0Y  	Other specified communication

  VW0Z  	Communication, unspecified

Mobility ()
This chapter is about moving by changing body position or location or by transferring from one place to another, by carrying, moving or manipulating objects, by walking, running or climbing, and by using various forms of transportation.
  VW10  	Maintaining a standing position
Staying in a standing position for some time such as when standing in a queue.
Inclusions:	staying in a standing position or hard surfaces
staying in a standing position on a slope
staying in a standing position on slippery surfaces

  VW11  	Transferring oneself
Moving from one surface to another, such as sliding along a bench or moving from a bed to a chair, without changing body position.
Exclusions:	Changing basic body position ()

  VW12  	Carrying, moving and handling objects

  VW13  	Walking
Moving along a surface on foot, step by step, so that one foot is always on the ground, such as when strolling, sauntering, walking forwards, backwards, or sideways.
Exclusions:	Moving around ()
Transferring oneself (VW11)

  VW14  	Moving around within the home
Walking and moving around in one's home, within a room, between rooms, and around the whole residence or living area.
Inclusions:	moving from floor to floor
moving on an attached balcony
moving in a restricted area such as a courtyard, porch or garden

  VW15  	Moving around using equipment
Moving the whole body from place to place, on any surface or space, by using specific devices designed to facilitate moving or create other ways of moving around, such as with skates, skis, or scuba equipment, or moving down the street in a self-propelled wheelchair or a walker.
Exclusions:	Driving ()
Moving around ()
Transferring oneself (VW11)
Using transportation (VW16)
Walking (VW13)

  VW16  	Using transportation
Using transportation to move around as a passenger, such as being driven in a car, bus, rickshaw, jitney, pram or stroller, wheelchair, animal-powered vehicle, private or public taxi, train, tram, subway, boat or aircraft and using humans for transportation.
Exclusions:	Driving ()
Moving around using equipment (VW15)

  VW1Y  	Other specified mobility

  VW1Z  	Mobility, unspecified

Self-care ()
This chapter is about caring for oneself, washing and drying oneself, caring for one's body and body parts, dressing, eating and drinking, and looking after one's health.
  VW20  	Washing oneself
Washing and drying one's whole body, or body parts, using water and appropriate cleaning and drying materials or methods, such as bathing, showering, washing hands and feet, face and hair, and drying with a towel.
Exclusions:	Caring for body parts (VW21)
Toileting (VW22)

  VW21  	Caring for body parts
Looking after those parts of the body, such as skin, face, teeth, scalp, nails and genitals, that require more than washing and drying.
Exclusions:	Toileting (VW22)
Washing oneself (VW20)

  VW22  	Toileting
Planning and carrying out the elimination of human waste (menstruation, urination and defecation), and clean oneself afterwards.
Exclusions:	Caring for body parts (VW21)
Dressing (VW23)
Moving around within the home (VW14)
Walking (VW13)
Washing oneself (VW20)

  VW23  	Dressing
Carrying out the coordinated actions and tasks of putting on and taking off clothes and footwear in sequence and in keeping with climatic and social conditions, such as by putting on, adjusting and removing shirts, skirts, blouses, pants, undergarments, saris, kimono, tights, hats, gloves, coats, shoes, boots, sandals and slippers.

  VW24  	Eating
Carrying out the coordinated tasks and actions of eating food that has been served, bringing it to the mouth and consuming it in culturally acceptable ways, cutting or breaking food into pieces, opening containers and packets, using eating implements, having meals, feasting or dining.
Exclusions:	Drinking ()
Preparing meals (VW30)

  VW25  	Looking after one's health
Ensuring physical comfort, health and physical and mental well-being, such as by maintaining a balanced diet, and an appropriate level of physical activity, keeping warm or cool, avoiding harms to health, following safe sex practices, including such as using condoms, getting immunizations and regular physical examinations.

  VW2Y  	Other specified self-care

  VW2Z  	Self-care, unspecified

Domestic life ()
This chapter is about carrying out domestic and everyday actions and tasks. Areas of domestic life include, caring for one's belongings and space, acquiring food, clothing and other necessities, household cleaning and repairing, caring for personal and other household objects, and assisting others.
  VW30  	Preparing meals
Planning, organizing, cooking and serving simple and complex meals for oneself and others, such as by making a menu, selecting edible food and drink, getting together ingredients for preparing meals,cooking with heat and preparing cold foods and drinks, and serving the food.
Exclusions:	Acquisition of goods and services ()
Caring for household objects ()
caring for others (VW32)
Doing housework (VW31)
Drinking ()
Eating (VW24)

  VW31  	Doing housework
Managing a household by cleaning the house, washing clothes, using household appliances, storing food and disposing of garbage, such as by sweeping, mopping, washing counters, walls and other surfaces; collecting and disposing of household garbage; tidying rooms, closets and drawers; collecting, washing, drying, folding and ironing clothes; cleaning footwear; using brooms, brushes and vacuum cleaners; using washing machines, dryers and irons.
Exclusions:	Acquiring a place to live ()
Acquisition of goods and services ()
Caring for household objects ()
caring for others (VW32)
Preparing meals (VW30)

  VW32  	Assisting others
Assisting household members and others with their learning, communicating, self-care, movement, within the house or outside; being concerned about the well-being of household members and others.
Exclusions:	Remunerative employment (VW50)

  VW3Y  	Other specified domestic life

  VW3Z  	Domestic life, unspecified

Interpersonal interactions and relationships ()
This chapter is about carrying out the actions and tasks required for basic and complex interactions with people (strangers, friends, relatives, family members and lovers) in a contextually and socially appropriate manner.
  VW40  	Basic interpersonal interactions
Interacting with people in a contextually and socially appropriate manner, such as by showing consideration and esteem when appropriate, or responding to the feelings of others.

  VW41  	Relating with strangers
Engaging in temporary contacts and links with strangers for specific purposes, such as asking for directions or making a purchase.
Engaging in temporary contacts and links with strangers for specific purposes, such as when asking for information, directions or making a purchase.

  VW42  	Intimate relationships
Creating and maintaining close or romantic relationships between individuals, such as husband and wife, lovers or sexual partners.

  VW4Y  	Other specified interpersonal interactions and relationships

  VW4Z  	Interpersonal interactions and relationships, unspecified

Major life areas ()
This chapter is about carrying out the tasks and actions required to engage in education, work and employment and to conduct economic transactions.
  VW50  	Remunerative employment
Engaging in all aspects of work, as an occupation, trade, profession or other form of employment, for payment, as an employee, full or part time, or self-employed, such as seeking employment and getting a job, doing the required tasks of the job, attending work on time as required, supervising other workers or being supervised, and performing required tasks alone or in groups.

  VW5Y  	Other specified major life areas

  VW5Z  	Major life areas, unspecified

Community, social and civic life ()
This chapter is about the actions and tasks required to engage in organized social life outside the family, in community, social and civic areas of life.
  VW60  	Recreation and leisure
Engaging in any form of play, recreational or leisure activity, such as informal or organized play and sports, programmes of physical fitness, relaxation, amusement or diversion, going to art galleries, museums, cinemas or theatres; engaging in crafts or hobbies, reading for enjoyment, playing musical instruments; sightseeings, tourism and travelling for pleasure.
Exclusions:	Political life and citizenship ()
Religion and spirituality ()
remunerative and non-remunerative work ( and ) ()
Riding animals for transportation ()

  VW61  	Human rights
Enjoying all nationally and internationally recognized rights that are accorded to people by virtue of their humanity alone, such as human rights as recognized by the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989), the United Nations Standard Rules for the Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities (1993), and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2006); the right to self-determination or autonomy; and the right to control over one's destiny.
Exclusions:	Political life and citizenship ()

  VW6Y  	Other specified community, social and civic life

  VW6Z  	Community, social and civic life, unspecified


  VW8Y  	Other specified generic functioning domains

  VW8Z  	Generic functioning domains, unspecified

